introduction/setup_guide.md, before:

# Setup Guide

## What This Section Covers:

This guide explains how to set up the tools you need to start working with the Red Pitaya FPGA projects. 

It covers:

- **Vivado Installation:**
  - Which version to install and why.
  - Step-by-step instructions for downloading and installing Vivado 2025.1.
  - Which device families to select (7 Series + Zynq-7000 SoC).
  - Notes on disk space, optional tools like DocNav, and system-wide install settings.

- **Opening a New Project:**
  - How to use Tcl scripts (make_cores.tcl, make_project.tcl) to quickly create a Vivado project.
  - Where cores go, and how to add extra ones (e.g. from Pavel Demin’s repository).
  - What IP cores are and why they matter.

- **Connecting to Your Red Pitaya:**
  - Links to the official quick start guide for powering and connecting your board.

- By the end, you’ll have Vivado installed, know how to generate a Red Pitaya project, and understand the role of IP cores and setup scripts.

## Vivado Installation

During my internship, I was using Vivado 2020.1 but that was because the official Red Pitaya repositories which I initially used to learn were written/tested for Vivado 2020.1. However, I would recommend you to download the latest version of Vivado. Below is installation guidance for 2025.1.

### 2025.1:

1. Go to [AMD's downloads webpage](https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html)[^1]
2. Scroll down to  AMD Unified Installer for FPGAs & Adaptive SoCs 2025.1: Windows Self Extracting Web Installer (EXE - 226.04 MB) and click it to start download.
3. You'll be taken to Sign-in page. Create an account if you don't have one, it is free and sign in. You'll then be asked to input some information about yourself, after which you can click on the "Download" button at the botton of the page to start the download.
4. Follow the instructions to set it up. You'll be taken to a welcome page, click "Next >", put your AMD details in and select "Download and Install Now."
5. Select Vivado as the product to install.
6. Select Vivado ML Standard as the edition to install.
7. When installing Vivado, you are asked to choose which FPGA device families to support. For Red Pitaya (STEMlab 125-14), you need to select:
    - 7 Series → The FPGA fabric inside the Red Pitaya (XC7Z010) belongs to the Xilinx 7 Series family.  
  This includes Artix-7, Kintex-7, Virtex-7, Spartan-7, and Zynq-7000 devices.  
  The programmable logic (FPGA part of the chip) is built using this 7-series architecture.
    - SoCs (Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC) → The Red Pitaya uses a Zynq-7000 SoC.  
    This combines:
        - An ARM Cortex-A9 processor (runs Linux, user programs, networking, file I/O).  
        - A 7 Series FPGA fabric (handles high-speed, parallel computations).  

    By selecting both 7 Series and SoCs, you ensure Vivado installs all the device libraries and IP cores needed to work with the Red Pitaya’s Zynq-7000 chip. 

    It does take up a lot of space - ~45-65 GB. If you are trying to save as much space as possible you can de-select DocNav, it is just an offline document viewer from AMD/Xilinx which you can access on their website or install later if you wish.

    ![vivado_ml_standard](../images/vivado_ml_standard.png)

8. On the next page, you'll be asked to accept some license agreements.
9. On the Select Destination Directory section, select **All users** under "Apply shortcut & file association selection to" so every user account on your computer can use Vivado without re-installing. It doesn't really matter if you're the only user of your laptop.
10. Find below the install summary, click install. It will take a while to install!
![vivado_install_summary](../images/vivado_install_summary.png)

## Opening a New Project

[1. Download the Final Vivado Folder](https://github.com/Bentwin2002/Group_IV_RP/tree/1916aeb4dfb7fd2a1658bcffc84c78c3ad14fbd9/Final_Vivado)

2. Open Vivado and in the Tcl Console, `cd` to where you saved the template
![set_up_guide_tcl_demo](/images/set_up_guide_demo.png)
3. Run the commands:

    ```
    source make_cores.tcl
    source make_project.tcl
    ```

- These Tcl scripts automate the setup:
  - `make_cores.tcl` packages everything inside the `/cores` folder into a local IP repository (`tmp/cores`).
  - `make_project.tcl` then creates a new Vivado project in the tmp/ folder, links in that IP repository, and builds the base block design.
  - A new folder (e.g. `tmp/project_name/`) will be created which contains the Vivado project files. You can open the project later by double-clicking the `.xpr` file inside.
  - If you want to start fresh, either delete the tmp folder or copy the template repository to a new location before running the scripts again. I would make a copy of the clean template and duplicate it for a new project.
- Renaming projects: If you want to change the project name, open `make_project.tcl` (not make_cores.tcl) and edit the line:

  ```
  set project_name your_project_name
  ```

- What are cores?
  - Cores are pre-packaged hardware modules (IP cores) that you can drag into your block design instead of writing HDL from scratch. In Pavel Demin’s repository you’ll find Red Pitaya-specific cores such as adc and dac, which provide ready-made building blocks for reading from the ADC or driving the DAC.
*This will make more sense once you go through the later sections and actually see them in the block design.*

**You don't have to understand the below if you are a beginner, feel free to skim and just continue onto connecting to your Red Pitaya**

### Adding Extra Cores

- Older resources say you can include extra cores — for example from [Pavel Demin’s repository](https://github.com/pavel-demin/red-pitaya-notes/tree/master/cores) — by:
  - Copying the desired core into `/cores/`.
  - Re-running:
  ```
  source make_cores.tcl
  source make_project.tcl
  ```
- This rebuilds the IP repository and regenerates the project with the new cores included.
- *I haven't actually tried this so be wary*
### If the core has only Verilog files

- In Pavel’s current repo, many cores are only Verilog files so I am not sure the above method will still work because I think you need a `core_config.tcl`. If that’s the case, you can still use the Verilog directly:
  - Start a new Vivado project (or open an existing one).
  - In the Project Manager panel, select Add Sources.
  - Choose Add or Create Design Sources.
  - Create a new file, give it a name, and click Finish.
  - Confirm with OK.
  - In the Sources window, double-click the new file and paste in the Verilog code for the module.
  - To bring it into your block design, right-click inside the block diagram and select Add Module.

## Connecting your Red Pitaya

There are multiple ways to connect to the Red Pitaya which is detailed [here](https://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickStart/first.html)

How I did it:

1. Insert SD card 
![SD card 1](/images/FPGA%20SD%20card/1.jpg)
![SD card 2](/images/FPGA%20SD%20card/2.jpg)
2. Connect ethernet cable from red pitaya to laptop and plug into power as shown below.
![connecting ethernet and power into red pitaya](/images/ethernet_and_power.JPEG)

### Uploading bitstream to red pitaya

This section is adapted from the [LED Blink Tutorial by Anton Potočnik](https://redpitaya-knowledge-base.readthedocs.io/en/latest/learn_fpga/4_lessons/LedBlink.html).[^2]

After generating your bitstream in vivado, it will generate the file to `<Path/to/repository>/tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1/system_wrapper.bit`

The method you use depends on which version of the Red Pitaya OS your board is running and if you're using Windows/Linux.

**Note:** for Windows change forward slash to backward slash.

#### OS v1.04 or earlier 

1. Open a command line on your computer:
  - Linux/macOS: open a Terminal
  - Windows: Command Prompt (CMD), PowerShell, or Git Bash. (I used Git bash)
2. Use the `cd` (change directory) command to move into the folder where Vivado stored your generated `.bit` file (the FPGA bitstream).
```bash
cd <Path/to/repository>tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1
```
3. Transfer the .bit file to the Red Pitaya. On Linux/macOS, you can use scp; on Windows you can use WinSCP or an equivalent tool:
You can re-name the `system_wrapper.bit` after `root/` to a name you prefer but just remember to be consistent and use that when you upload your bitstream.
```bash
scp system_wrapper.bit root@rp-xxxxxx.local:/root/system_wrapper.bit
```
4. Log into the red pitaya via SSH
```bash
ssh root@rp-xxxxxx.local
```
5. Check if the file is there:
```bash
ls
```
6. Load the bitstream into the FPGA
```bash
cat system_wrapper.bit > /dev/xdevcfg
```

### OS v2.00

1. For Windows, open the Vivado Tcl console or Vivado HSL Command Prompt and for Linux open the Terminal move to the directory where the `.bit` file was generated.
```bash
cd <Path/to/repository>tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1
``` 
2. Convert the `.bit` file to `.bin` file
- Windows(Vivado TCL console or Vivado HSL Command Prompt):
```tcl
echo all:{ system_wrapper.bit } > system_wrapper.bif
bootgen -image system_wrapper.bif -arch zynq -process_bitstream bin -o system_wrapper.bit.bin -w
```
- Linux and Windows(WSL + Normal CMD)
```bash
echo -n "all:{ system_wrapper.bit }" >  system_wrapper.bif
bootgen -image system_wrapper.bif -arch zynq -process_bitstream bin -o system_wrapper.bit.bin -w
```
3. Transfer the .bit file to the Red Pitaya. On Linux/macOS, you can use `scp`; on Windows you can use WinSCP or an equivalent tool. You can repalce the "led_blink.bit.bin" with what you want to call the file:
```bash
scp system_wrapper.bit.bin root@rp-xxxxxx.local:/root/led_blink.bit.bin
```
4. Log into the Red Pitaya via SSH
```bash
ssh root@rp-xxxxxx.local
```
5. Check if the file is present
```bash
ls
```
6. Program the FPGA with the uploaded `.bin` file:
```bash
fpgautil -b led_blink.bit.bin
```
7. If at any point you want to return the board to its default Red Pitaya FPGA configuration, you can do so by running the following command:
  - OS v1.04 or earlier:
  ```bash
  cat /opt/redpitaya/fpga/fpga_0.94.bit > /dev/xdevcfg
  ```
  - OS v2.00: 
  ```bash
  overlay.sh v0.94
  ```


## Acknowledgements & References

This setup guide is adapted from internal Red Pitaya notes by M. Barendregt (2022)[^3] and B. Millward (2023)[^4], written within the Kagome Lattice subgroup of the MBQD group at the University of Cambridge during their Red Pitaya projects.

### References
[^1]: AMD. *Vivado Design Tools – Downloads Page*. Available at: [https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html](https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html)

[^2]: Potočnik, Anton. *LED Blink Tutorial*. Red Pitaya Knowledge Base, Red Pitaya d.o.o. Available at: https://redpitaya-knowledge-base.readthedocs.io/en/latest/learn_fpga/4_lessons/LedBlink.html

[^3]: M. Barendregt, *Red Pitaya*, Kagome Lattice – MBQD Group, University of Cambridge, Internal Notes, Summer 2022. Retrieved from Kagome Wiki. Available at: [https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya](https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya)  

[^4]: B. Millward, *Red Pitaya Guide*, Kagome Lattice – MBQD Group, University of Cambridge, Internal Notes, 2023. Retrieved from Kagome Wiki. Available at: [https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya](https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya)

Commit message:

system_wrapper.bit location if no changes were made to the make_project.tcl

introduction/setup_guide.md, after:

# Setup Guide

## What This Section Covers:

This guide explains how to set up the tools you need to start working with the Red Pitaya FPGA projects. 

It covers:

- **Vivado Installation:**
  - Which version to install and why.
  - Step-by-step instructions for downloading and installing Vivado 2025.1.
  - Which device families to select (7 Series + Zynq-7000 SoC).
  - Notes on disk space, optional tools like DocNav, and system-wide install settings.

- **Opening a New Project:**
  - How to use Tcl scripts (make_cores.tcl, make_project.tcl) to quickly create a Vivado project.
  - Where cores go, and how to add extra ones (e.g. from Pavel Demin’s repository).
  - What IP cores are and why they matter.

- **Connecting to Your Red Pitaya:**
  - Links to the official quick start guide for powering and connecting your board.

- By the end, you’ll have Vivado installed, know how to generate a Red Pitaya project, and understand the role of IP cores and setup scripts.

## Vivado Installation

During my internship, I was using Vivado 2020.1 but that was because the official Red Pitaya repositories which I initially used to learn were written/tested for Vivado 2020.1. However, I would recommend you to download the latest version of Vivado. Below is installation guidance for 2025.1.

### 2025.1:

1. Go to [AMD's downloads webpage](https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html)[^1]
2. Scroll down to  AMD Unified Installer for FPGAs & Adaptive SoCs 2025.1: Windows Self Extracting Web Installer (EXE - 226.04 MB) and click it to start download.
3. You'll be taken to Sign-in page. Create an account if you don't have one, it is free and sign in. You'll then be asked to input some information about yourself, after which you can click on the "Download" button at the botton of the page to start the download.
4. Follow the instructions to set it up. You'll be taken to a welcome page, click "Next >", put your AMD details in and select "Download and Install Now."
5. Select Vivado as the product to install.
6. Select Vivado ML Standard as the edition to install.
7. When installing Vivado, you are asked to choose which FPGA device families to support. For Red Pitaya (STEMlab 125-14), you need to select:
    - 7 Series → The FPGA fabric inside the Red Pitaya (XC7Z010) belongs to the Xilinx 7 Series family.  
  This includes Artix-7, Kintex-7, Virtex-7, Spartan-7, and Zynq-7000 devices.  
  The programmable logic (FPGA part of the chip) is built using this 7-series architecture.
    - SoCs (Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC) → The Red Pitaya uses a Zynq-7000 SoC.  
    This combines:
        - An ARM Cortex-A9 processor (runs Linux, user programs, networking, file I/O).  
        - A 7 Series FPGA fabric (handles high-speed, parallel computations).  

    By selecting both 7 Series and SoCs, you ensure Vivado installs all the device libraries and IP cores needed to work with the Red Pitaya’s Zynq-7000 chip. 

    It does take up a lot of space - ~45-65 GB. If you are trying to save as much space as possible you can de-select DocNav, it is just an offline document viewer from AMD/Xilinx which you can access on their website or install later if you wish.

    ![vivado_ml_standard](../images/vivado_ml_standard.png)

8. On the next page, you'll be asked to accept some license agreements.
9. On the Select Destination Directory section, select **All users** under "Apply shortcut & file association selection to" so every user account on your computer can use Vivado without re-installing. It doesn't really matter if you're the only user of your laptop.
10. Find below the install summary, click install. It will take a while to install!
![vivado_install_summary](../images/vivado_install_summary.png)

## Opening a New Project

[1. Download the Final Vivado Folder](https://github.com/Bentwin2002/Group_IV_RP/tree/1916aeb4dfb7fd2a1658bcffc84c78c3ad14fbd9/Final_Vivado)

2. Open Vivado and in the Tcl Console, `cd` to where you saved the template
![set_up_guide_tcl_demo](/images/set_up_guide_demo.png)
3. Run the commands:

    ```
    source make_cores.tcl
    source make_project.tcl
    ```

- These Tcl scripts automate the setup:
  - `make_cores.tcl` packages everything inside the `/cores` folder into a local IP repository (`tmp/cores`).
  - `make_project.tcl` then creates a new Vivado project in the tmp/ folder, links in that IP repository, and builds the base block design.
  - A new folder (e.g. `tmp/project_name/`) will be created which contains the Vivado project files. You can open the project later by double-clicking the `.xpr` file inside.
  - If you want to start fresh, either delete the tmp folder or copy the template repository to a new location before running the scripts again. I would make a copy of the clean template and duplicate it for a new project.
- Renaming projects: If you want to change the project name, open `make_project.tcl` (not make_cores.tcl) and edit the line:

  ```
  set project_name your_project_name
  ```

- What are cores?
  - Cores are pre-packaged hardware modules (IP cores) that you can drag into your block design instead of writing HDL from scratch. In Pavel Demin’s repository you’ll find Red Pitaya-specific cores such as adc and dac, which provide ready-made building blocks for reading from the ADC or driving the DAC.
*This will make more sense once you go through the later sections and actually see them in the block design.*

**You don't have to understand the below if you are a beginner, feel free to skim and just continue onto connecting to your Red Pitaya**

### Adding Extra Cores

- Older resources say you can include extra cores — for example from [Pavel Demin’s repository](https://github.com/pavel-demin/red-pitaya-notes/tree/master/cores) — by:
  - Copying the desired core into `/cores/`.
  - Re-running:
  ```
  source make_cores.tcl
  source make_project.tcl
  ```
- This rebuilds the IP repository and regenerates the project with the new cores included.
- *I haven't actually tried this so be wary*
### If the core has only Verilog files

- In Pavel’s current repo, many cores are only Verilog files so I am not sure the above method will still work because I think you need a `core_config.tcl`. If that’s the case, you can still use the Verilog directly:
  - Start a new Vivado project (or open an existing one).
  - In the Project Manager panel, select Add Sources.
  - Choose Add or Create Design Sources.
  - Create a new file, give it a name, and click Finish.
  - Confirm with OK.
  - In the Sources window, double-click the new file and paste in the Verilog code for the module.
  - To bring it into your block design, right-click inside the block diagram and select Add Module.

## Connecting your Red Pitaya

There are multiple ways to connect to the Red Pitaya which is detailed [here](https://redpitaya.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickStart/first.html)

How I did it:

1. Insert SD card 
![SD card 1](/images/FPGA%20SD%20card/1.jpg)
![SD card 2](/images/FPGA%20SD%20card/2.jpg)
2. Connect ethernet cable from red pitaya to laptop and plug into power as shown below.
![connecting ethernet and power into red pitaya](/images/ethernet_and_power.JPEG)

### Uploading bitstream to red pitaya

This section is adapted from the [LED Blink Tutorial by Anton Potočnik](https://redpitaya-knowledge-base.readthedocs.io/en/latest/learn_fpga/4_lessons/LedBlink.html).[^2]

After generating your bitstream in vivado, it will generate the file to `<Path/to/repository>/tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1/system_wrapper.bit`
If you didn't rename the project in the `make_project.tcl`, it will look something more like `<Path/to/repository>/tmp/Calibration/Calibration.runs/impl1/system_wrapper.bit`.

The method you use depends on which version of the Red Pitaya OS your board is running and if you're using Windows/Linux.

**Note:** for Windows change forward slash to backward slash.

#### OS v1.04 or earlier 

1. Open a command line on your computer:
  - Linux/macOS: open a Terminal
  - Windows: Command Prompt (CMD), PowerShell, or Git Bash. (I used Git bash)
2. Use the `cd` (change directory) command to move into the folder where Vivado stored your generated `.bit` file (the FPGA bitstream). If you didn't rename the project in the `make_project.tcl`, your path will look something more like `<Path/to/repository>/tmp/Calibration/Calibration.runs/impl1/system_wrapper.bit`.
```bash
cd <Path/to/repository>tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1
```
3. Transfer the .bit file to the Red Pitaya. On Linux/macOS, you can use scp; on Windows you can use WinSCP or an equivalent tool:
You can re-name the `system_wrapper.bit` after `root/` to a name you prefer but just remember to be consistent and use that when you upload your bitstream.
```bash
scp system_wrapper.bit root@rp-xxxxxx.local:/root/system_wrapper.bit
```
4. Log into the red pitaya via SSH
```bash
ssh root@rp-xxxxxx.local
```
5. Check if the file is there:
```bash
ls
```
6. Load the bitstream into the FPGA
```bash
cat system_wrapper.bit > /dev/xdevcfg
```

### OS v2.00

1. For Windows, open the Vivado Tcl console or Vivado HSL Command Prompt and for Linux open the Terminal move to the directory where the `.bit` file was generated. If you didn't rename the project in the `make_project.tcl`, it will look something more like `<Path/to/repository>/tmp/Calibration/Calibration.runs/impl1/system_wrapper.bit`.
```bash
cd <Path/to/repository>tmp/led_blink/led_blink.runs/impl1
``` 
2. Convert the `.bit` file to `.bin` file
- Windows(Vivado TCL console or Vivado HSL Command Prompt):
```tcl
echo all:{ system_wrapper.bit } > system_wrapper.bif
bootgen -image system_wrapper.bif -arch zynq -process_bitstream bin -o system_wrapper.bit.bin -w
```
- Linux and Windows(WSL + Normal CMD)
```bash
echo -n "all:{ system_wrapper.bit }" >  system_wrapper.bif
bootgen -image system_wrapper.bif -arch zynq -process_bitstream bin -o system_wrapper.bit.bin -w
```
3. Transfer the .bit file to the Red Pitaya. On Linux/macOS, you can use `scp`; on Windows you can use WinSCP or an equivalent tool. You can repalce the "led_blink.bit.bin" with what you want to call the file:
```bash
scp system_wrapper.bit.bin root@rp-xxxxxx.local:/root/led_blink.bit.bin
```
4. Log into the Red Pitaya via SSH
```bash
ssh root@rp-xxxxxx.local
```
5. Check if the file is present
```bash
ls
```
6. Program the FPGA with the uploaded `.bin` file:
```bash
fpgautil -b led_blink.bit.bin
```
7. If at any point you want to return the board to its default Red Pitaya FPGA configuration, you can do so by running the following command:
  - OS v1.04 or earlier:
  ```bash
  cat /opt/redpitaya/fpga/fpga_0.94.bit > /dev/xdevcfg
  ```
  - OS v2.00: 
  ```bash
  overlay.sh v0.94
  ```


## Acknowledgements & References

This setup guide is adapted from internal Red Pitaya notes by M. Barendregt (2022)[^3] and B. Millward (2023)[^4], written within the Kagome Lattice subgroup of the MBQD group at the University of Cambridge during their Red Pitaya projects.

### References
[^1]: AMD. *Vivado Design Tools – Downloads Page*. Available at: [https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html](https://www.xilinx.com/support/download/index.html/content/xilinx/en/downloadNav/vivado-design-tools.html)

[^2]: Potočnik, Anton. *LED Blink Tutorial*. Red Pitaya Knowledge Base, Red Pitaya d.o.o. Available at: https://redpitaya-knowledge-base.readthedocs.io/en/latest/learn_fpga/4_lessons/LedBlink.html

[^3]: M. Barendregt, *Red Pitaya*, Kagome Lattice – MBQD Group, University of Cambridge, Internal Notes, Summer 2022. Retrieved from Kagome Wiki. Available at: [https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya](https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya)  

[^4]: B. Millward, *Red Pitaya Guide*, Kagome Lattice – MBQD Group, University of Cambridge, Internal Notes, 2023. Retrieved from Kagome Wiki. Available at: [https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya](https://wiki.cam.ac.uk/kagome/Red_Pitaya)
